# PODNAME: DDG::Manual::Translation
# ABSTRACT: Overview of the translation system of DuckDuckGo

=encoding utf-8

=head1 THE MISSION 

Translating a complex and growing system like DuckDuckGo is not an easy task.
The system is scattered across many subcomponents, which only come together to
form a whole in the user's browser (for the most part). On a coding level,
many disparate elements have to combine to give the final product: 
HTML snippets located in various parts of the system, many elements 
of JavaScript as well as other microsolutions which have been put
in place to add specific functionality. The complexity doesn't arise
solely from the coding aspect of the translation platform, but also
from the need to effectively and efficiently manage the translation,
and ensure that it is high quality. We are a small team, which
limits what we can do; we are therefore relying on the community
to help us in this endeavour, and managing a community of volunteers
is more complex and difficult than relying on a dedicated team.

=head2 Own platform vs Existing Solutions

We originally tried to use existing solutions to help us in translating,
DuckDuckGo, but did not feel that anything on the market met our needs.
The biggest flaw in the systems we attmpted to use was the lack of 
context specificity, as well as the commenting system for the tokens.
Furthermore, as we wanted a feature for the translation of images and
other media, as well as a way of translating long pieces of text, we
were disappointed to note that these were lacking on all existing
solutions on all of the platforms that we tested.

As it stands, our biggest issues are coordinating the translation effort 
and defining proper processes for the translation flows — both of which
could easily be solved by using our own system. This is what we have
ended up doing.

=head1 WHAT IS TRANSLATION?

People who have never attempted a translation project might not be
aware of the problems which can arise. We would like to explain
some of the fundamental difficulties, many of which are particularly
applicable to native English speakers who have not studied a foreign
language.

=head2 Word order

The importance of word order varies significantly from language to language. 
In some, a case system might make sentence structure very clear with little 
importance placed on the order of words; in others, word order might be key to
conveying a particular message. In fact, even within languages, word order is 
important: two very disparate messages can be inferred from the same sentence
with different emphasis or word placement. The lack of endings in English make
a strict word order very important: "The dog eats the cat" is not the same as
"the cat eats the dog", though the words themselves do not appear different
whether they are the subject or object of the sentence. This makes translation
of blocks of texts difficult to standardise, as any approximation is likely
to be relevant only to one language. Furthermore, idioms add a further level
of complexity to translation of text in general, but particularly translation
of blocks of text. Word order, therefore, cannot be conserved between the source
document and the final document, as it may be completely different in the target
language.

As another example, consider the sentence "You have x messages". This could be
broken down into

  'You have ' + $count + ' messages'

Unfortunately, this would lead to issues further down the line. Translating
only the first and last snippets and reintroducing them into the original
sentence, with the original order, might not yield a coherent sentence in
the target language,  again because of the way in which different languages
work, and the way in which words are ordered.

=head2 No direct translations possible

Not every word can be 1:1 translated into another language. There are many
cases where a specific context might change the meaning of a word, or you have
lots of bigger diversity in the words than you have in the language you use as
reference. A common reference people make here, is the amount of L<Eskimo words
for snow|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eskimo_words_for_snow>, which says that
there are more than 50 different words for snow in the language eskimos are
speaking. This is sadly a hoax, so we can't refer to it as an example, but
something you might stumble upon on airports in Germany is the sentence:

  Bitte anschnallen!

Which is the english translation for:

  Fasten your seat belts!

If you would translate the German words "directly" to English, you would
get the sentence:

  Please fasten!

No English speaker would ever say this that way. You may think that it misses
out information, but that is all right for germans, they understand exactly
what you mean. A german would never say:

  Bitte festschnallen mit ihrem Sicherheitsgurt!

which would be the "direct" translation of the english version. It would
just be very very bad German to translate it that way, no German speaker would ever do
that. So the context of the words is very important sometimes, to get a real
"human touch" in the translation you offer. Else we would use automatic
translation systems, which are unable to find these kinds of specialities in
nearly all cases.

A small subexample that directly comes up: Yes, B<anschnallen> and
B<festschnallen> are actually the same word in english: B<fasten>. B<fasten>
actually translates to L<12 different words in
german|http://dict.leo.org/ende?searchLoc=-1&searchLocRelinked=-1&lp=ende&search=fasten&lp=ende&lang=de&searchLoc=0&searchLocRelinked=1&search=>.

=head2 Right to left

Yes, really, there are languages in the world, which are written right to left.
Beside the mess this brings to your hand if you are right handed, this is also
a huge difference in the web interface. You can see how a right to left page
looks like L<here|http://www.i18nguy.com/unicode/shma.html>. This also changes
about most punctuations and of course the flow of the page itself, even if you
force a specific order, you must revert it from right to left.

=head2 Grammatical numbers

  In most languages (like English), there are 2 so called grammatical
cases for numbers: B<singular> and B<plural>. In those languages B<plural> is used, if you
have none, or many. And B<singular> is only used if you have just one:

  You have 1 message.
  You have 2 messages. (or also 0 or more than 2)

In other languages, there are up to 5 different cases for B<plural>. It Sometimes depends
on complex maths which we don't like to explain, but luckily the world
has defined logic for this. This is a concept implemented in gettext, so this
form is what we actually use, because our implementation is on top of gettext
for most base infrastructure. The English (and most other languages) plural
definition for gettext is:

  nplurals=2; plural=(n != 1)

This describes the logic we've mentioned above, that we have 2 grammatical
numbers (B<singular> and B<plural>), and the first plural form is used, if the
amount described is not 1.

Don't be scared! All those definitions are fixed, you can find them on this
awesome page, and you don't need to define them any more (Except if you want to define a
fantasy language) L<http://translate.sourceforge.net/wiki/l10n/pluralforms>.

In Slovak (the language spoken in L<Slovakia|https://duckduckgo.com/Slovakia>)
there are 3 "plural forms", defined by this gettext definition:

  nplurals=3; plural=(n==1) ? 0 : (n>=2 && n<=4) ? 1 : 2

So the text above would require 3 cases:

  Mas 1 spravu.
  Mas 2 spravy. (or 3 and 4)
  Mas 5 sprav. (or also 0 and more than 5)

=head2 Gender cases

Also relevant in most languages, is the gender, which might have influence on
the case of the word. We just mention it in this documentation as an element
that could be taken into concern. So far our system is not able to handle this
problem.

=head1 TRANSLATION SYSTEM

After understanding those base problems that come up, you might see that it is
very intense, in terms of resources, to handle every problem of translations. We don't want
to reinvent the wheel here, but the existing solutions are not covering all of our
needs, which means we need to make our own translation system, by trying to
use as many existing solutions as possible, to reduce the amount of work.

We use our own community platform for managing all the translations. This
allows us to make very individual concepts and workflows specifically for our
needs. Especially, integrating the translation with socializing components and
more visualization options is a key that allows us to give people who
translate the texts the optimum environment for understanding the deeper
meaning of the text to translate.

You should make an account at the L<community platform|https://dukgo.com/>, if
you want to follow all steps of this documentation. This account is required
for working with the translation system, but as long as you don't make your
account public (you have an option for this in your account menu), noone will
see any information about you, not even the username, only your translations
will be stored in the database, so that the users can vote for it.

The following sections explain all relevant components in detail.

=head2 Storage

I<This section is very technical, and can be skipped, if you are not interested
in the technical decisions we made. Just go directly to L</Tokens>.>

The storage for the translations is a very important topic, it defines most of
the decisions you have to make afterwards. The storage must be really fast and
effective, especially inside the code. Replicating existing concepts here would
produce a massive overhead, which would lead to the analyzis of the existing libraries
for this topic which are fast enough for our requirements. Sadly, we also had
to think about a solution that works inside JavaScript, so that we can
integrate it easily into our JavaScript code, which drives most of the
visuals on a modern browser on DuckDuckGo.

There are some pretty interesting solutions in Perl which allow us to really
cover up all cases, like gender, but those solutions are specific to Perl
and can't work in JavaScript. In the end we decided "down" to the very common
L<gettext|http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/> system, which also has a
L<JavaScript implementation|http://jsgettext.berlios.de/> and is covered with
implementations in all languages, like Perl, Ruby, Python and other languages
where we might need to integrate translation.

Especially, the existence of a very wide used and accepted plain C
implementation makes it also reliable in many ways. The C library delivers
directly a commandline tool to convert text based datafiles for the
translations (the so called po files) to highly effective binary files, to make
this data accessible very quickly (the binary file is called mo). This tool is
called B<msgfmt> and included in the B<gettext> package of your distribution.

In the JavaScript implementation we have a small Perl program B<po2json> which
converts the same text datafile into a json format that is more usable in
JavaScript. Sadly this datafile must be of course loaded in the browser, you
might see that big JavaScript file on the load of DuckDuckGo which integrates
the translations together with the libraries for using those. We compress this
to make it smaller for the bandwidth. More optimization options are open here.

In the end gettext is able to solve the problems with the non direct
translations and the grammatical number cases. It is by itself not able to
solve the gender case or the order of text problems, especially with combined elements that have to be translated independently. The possibility to
extend our system to manage the gender case too is open, but we are not heading
towards this yet.

=head2 Locale::Simple

Many people who never did translation before, but heard of I<gettext>, think 
that I<gettext> itself directly handles everything you need for the
translation, but it has no real concept for combined tokens or placeholders for
dynamic text. I<gettext> works only as storage and accessor for the
translations you need. It solves lots of problems that you really can't easily solve
alone, but it misses those very important details.

We still need to wrap I<gettext> with L<sprintf|https://duckduckgo.com/sprintf>
to make it really useful. This will allow us to combine tokens with HTML and
other formats. We will describe this in the next section.

We released this wrapping, which has the exactly same API for Perl, Python
and JavaScript on L<CPAN|http://cpan.org/> and L<pypi|http://pypi.python.org/>.
You can install it with cpan or your favorite CPAN package installer for Perl,
like L<App::cpanminus|https://metacpan.org/module/App::cpanminus>:

  cpanm Locale::Simple

or for python with pip2 in your userspace:

  pip2 install --user locale-simple

Inside the Perl distribution, you find also all the JavaScript required, if you
want to use it for your own project someday. If you want to play around with
Perl in general, please consider installing L<perlbrew|http://www.perlbrew.pl/>
first. It's not required to install any of this to contribute.

=head2 Tokens

The storage also determines the way we define the base of our workflow with
the translations. These are the so called B<tokens>, which are the main part of
all the flows about translation. The coders are making tokens in the code, the
templates or wherever it's needed. Those tokens define the texts that have to
get translated. So, a very important point here is to understand that the
text that has to be translated is the token. Let's see some examples of 
templates that make it easier to understand this system.

=head3 Simple token

  <: l('Monthly newsletter:') :>

This defines a simple token with the text 'Monthy newsletter:'. So
I<gettext>, our translation storage actually has no data file for these so
called tokens itself, because the text data file only contains the token AND a
translation. But, to have a good normalization, we store this in our database
under the same fieldnames as expected by I<gettext>, so I display it to you now
like a "partly" I<po> file without the translation, this makes it easier to
understand it:

  msgid "Monthly newsletter:"

Those tokens we store in the database of our community platform at
L<https://dukgo.com/translate/do/index>. For the token itself, there exists no page,
but here is the page for this specific token in german:
L<https://dukgo.com/translate/tokenlanguage/26811>.

In the general translation interface of the community platform, you normally
see a list of those tokens, but we will explain the translation interface
later, not to make it too complex for the moment. You can see the text to translate
right next to the word "Singular" on top. Below you see the translations of other
users for it, there is (right now) only one for german.

When there is no translation found, the system always gives back the token
itself. At DuckDuckGo all tokens are given in English of the United States.

=head3 Token with context

As you can see here, this is a very simple token, it is just text, it does not
really concern any of our problem cases. Another problem case would be, for
example, the token I<Medium>. This is a very very vague word, you need a bit of
a context to really find the right translation, even if you think that it is very clear in english, you can imagine that a lonely I<Medium> can be in lots of
different kinds of context. I<gettext> offers here the option to give a so
called B<context> additional to a token, which allows us to give a bit more
"context" without changing the token itself. In the template it would look like
this:

  <: lp('size','Medium') :>

and in the I<gettext> storage:

  msgctxt "size"
  msgid "Medium"

This means that we want the token "Medium" in the context of "size". The
advantage here is now, if there would be for example:

  <: lp('weight','Medium') :>

Then there are 2 tokens in the system to translate, both with different
context. Here you can see the page for the German translation of this shown
token L<https://dukgo.com/translate/tokenlanguage/26671>. As you see, above the
word that has to be translated, you see B<Context>, which SHOULD not be taken as
a real description for the context, on contrary this context helps everyone
working with the tokens to find this specific token in the code, templates or
wherever it needs to be coordinated, and it should be a much clearer
description in the notes for this token.

So here is already a very first thing to take care of, if you are
responsible for working with tokens, you can't give everything a context, else
the reusage of tokens is much harder, but you also can't expect that everything
works fine without using any context for specific words, especially if they are
very lonely.

=head3 Placeholders in tokens

Placeholders in tokens are giving many options to make the displaying of the
text more finetuned. Often it is required that inside the text itself you put
a special wrapping for the display, like HTML; this can be achieved with
placeholders. They are also used to allow number specific case decision, the
problem described in L</Grammatical numbers> section. Here is a simple example of a
dynamic text inside a token:

  <: l("Hello %s!",$username) :>

This allows to give a username to the token, but still allows the
translator to move the dynamic text to another place, which is more proper in
his language (like if it would be right to left, the placeholder might be more
left). 2 things are happening now in the translation system:

At first I<gettext> will try to find the translation for this given token, and
in the translation the translator also keeps this placeholder B<%s>. After this
translation is found, for example going B<Pirate>:

  %s, ahoi! hrrr

Given this translation example, the translated text for a user switched to
L<Pirate|https://duckduckgo.com/?kad=pirate_XX>, with the username B<yegg>,
would be:

  yegg, ahoi! hrrr

=head3 Placeholders and grammatical numbers

Additionally to placeholders for text, we always cover combined with I<gettext>
the option for dynamic numbered cases, which requires to decide for the proper
grammatical numbers case in the language, and replace the placeholder for the
number with the number given for the case. Here is an example for a numbered case
of a token in the template (or code, or JavaScript):

  <: ln("You have %d message.","You have %d messages.",$messages) :>

This is used to define a token which is based on the number for the specific
token. In the definition in the I<gettext> storage it ends like this:

  msgid "You have %d message."
  msgid_plural "You have %d messages."

Just to directly show that this can, of course, be combined with a B<context>:

  <: lnp("email","You have %d message.","You have %d messages.",$messages) :>

which ends up in this form in I<gettext>:

  msgctxt "email"
  msgid "You have %d message."
  msgid_plural "You have %d messages."

First, I<gettext> will check with the current plural definitions (see above),
what specific plural case is required for this translation. As mentioned on the
section L</Grammatical numbers>, some languages might have more than 2 forms
for this. But whatever it is, I<gettext> handles this with the translation
datafile for the given language. I will present a translated example later.

After I<gettext> has picked the correct translated text, it will put this
translation towards L<sprintf|https://duckduckgo.com/sprintf>, which replaces
the placeholders with the proper values.

If we have B<$messages> like B<3> on the above example, the output would be:

  You have 3 messages.

The combination of I<gettext> and I<sprintf> here sadly has the disadvantage
to force the amount that defines the plural form to be the first placeholder.
This makes problems in the combination with combined tokens. We will explain the
problem in the section L</Combined tokens>, later in this manual.

The following section about sprintf describes more deeply how the placeholders
are functioning, but normally this is only relevant for developers who generate
tokens for the system.

=head4 sprintf

I<This section is very technical, and can be skipped. Just go directly to
L</Combined tokens>.>

sprintf is a C function that defines the so called printf conventions for
formatting a text with dynamic data. You will find it in every language, so you
can always refer to the usage via your favorite programming language
documentation. Some of the most relevant overview I will describe here:

sprintf is made to take a format definition and some values for the dynamic
parts in this definition to produce a new string. A simple example in Perl
would be:

  perl -e'print sprintf("%s is my search engine!","DuckDuckGo")."\n";'

The output of this will be:

  DuckDuckGo is my search engine!

The B<%s> in the first parameter of sprintf is replaced with the second
parameter we have given to the sprintf call. This is a very simple example,
B<%s> means B<string> in this case. Alternative options are:

  %%    a percent sign
  %c    a character with the given number
  %s    a string
  %d    a signed integer, in decimal
  %u    an unsigned integer, in decimal
  %o    an unsigned integer, in octal
  %x    an unsigned integer, in hexadecimal
  %e    a floating-point number, in scientific notation
  %f    a floating-point number, in fixed decimal notation
  %g    a floating-point number, in %e or %f notation

You will normally only face B<%s> and probably B<%d> in the context of
DuckDuckGo, so don't be scared about the other options.

B<%d> is specific to display a number, as decimal, so if you would say:

  sprintf("%d bottles of beer",99.0);

In your language, where 99.0 defines a float number, you would still get back:

  "99 bottles of beer"

A very important point here is the possibility to give several parameters, AND
reorder them in the usage, for example:

  sprintf("From %s to %s",'A','B');
  # returns "From A to B"

This seems to force always B<$from> in the first %s that appears, and B<$to> in
the second appearance of %s. If in some languages for example the order for this
case gets "other around", then we can't change the order in the code of course,
nor make a switch. Luckily sprintf allows us to use the data in other orders than
given, as you can see on this example:

  sprintf("To %2$s from %1$s",'A','B');
  # returns "To B from A"

This tells sprintf to put the first extra value into the B<%1$s> and the second
extra value into B<%2$s>. So, if a translation that hits several placeholders,
needs a different order for them, it can use this syntax to achieve this.

If you want to know more about sprintf, you can checkout the L<perldoc to
sprintf|http://perldoc.perl.org/functions/sprintf.html>, but for anything
related to tokens, you leave the placeholders always like it is in the tokens.
Deeper knowledge of sprintf is only required for people who define tokens.

=head3 Combined tokens

With the understanding of sprintf, we are now able to make tokens specific for
special visual needs, like if they need additional HTML. An example could be:

  <: l('%s for more info!', '<a href="...">' ~ l('Click here') ~ '</a>' :>

Would give out:

  <a href="...">Click here</a> for more info!

Which allows us to exclude the HTML from the translation, and still gives the
translator enough freedom to define which part of his text is the text that
should be clickable (or colored differently or whatever).

A bigger problem exists, if we combine those placeholders with
number placeholders, explained in the section L</Placeholders and grammatical
numbers>, this concept forces to get the amount that is used to determine the
proper plural form that must be set to the first position. It could lead to a
problem, like in this case:

  $username has $count message.
  $username has $count messages.

If we would try to convert this to B<"%s has %d messages.">, we would run into
the problem that the first placeholder would be B<$username> and not
B<$count>. To avoid this we can use the method of I<sprintf> to change the
order of the values given for the placeholders. The right solution would be:

  <: ln("%2$s has %1$d message.","%2$s has %1$d messages.",$count,$username) :>

The very big disadvantage here is the organizational part. It is really complex
to have all those tokens in the database and still refering which ones are
staying together. It always requires lots of comments and further information.
In some very awkward cases, you may have a real extreme cascading of the tokens. In those
cases it is really essential to generate B<context>, here is a bigger example
from our JavaScript:

  lp('webelieve','%s believe in %s AND %s.',
    '<a href="/about">' + lp('webelieve','We') + '</a>',
    '<a href="/goodies">' + lp('webelieve','better search') + '</a>',
    '<a href="http://donttrack.us">' + lp('webelieve','no tracking') + '</a>'
  );

Which is written like this in gettext:

  msgctxt "webelieve"
  msgid "%s believe in %s AND %s."

  msgctxt "webelieve"
  msgid "We"

  msgctxt "webelieve"
  msgid "better search"

  msgctxt "webelieve"
  msgid "no tracking"

You can now imagine that without some more comments, it is very hard to get it
right to translate those texts. Best is if the user additionally has an URL to
see the tokens in action. Especially in the flow of all untranslated tokens,
which is what most users do to help us translating.

Most combined tokens are gathered under one specific B<msgctxt>, in the
translation interface. You can click on the context given in the interface to
reach a page with all tokens of this specific context. Still we try to add
comments to every token that describes the complete text context where the token
is used.

=head3 Token translation functions

  l(            msgid,                      ... )
  ln(           msgid, msgid_plural, count, ... )
  lp(  msgctxt, msgid,                      ... )
  lnp( msgctxt, msgid, msgid_plural, count, ... )

=head3 Token scraping

I<This section is only relevant for people who put tokens in the code or the
HTML, and can be skipped. Just go directly to L</Token translation storage>.>

For L</Locale::Simple>, we made a scraper which is able to parse through any
Javascript, Perl or Python scripts, to find those tokens. It is very primitive and
can't really fully parse any code. This makes it relevant to be careful about
the positions of the tokens:

Always have the complete token, and everything that is in it, in one line. This
is something we hope to change soon, but parsing any
possible code combination for all the specific languages is very complex.

Be aware that every parameter of the token must be really written out. That
means you can't use code, to generate magically fixed B<msgctxt> for a group of
tokens and add it via variables. This is neither allowed nor the purpose of
translation tokens. You can only use placeholders, but you are not allowed to
write code that gives out the token. You only work with the result.

=head3 Token translation storage

As described in the previous sections, the database of the community platform
stores all the translations, which then gets generated into the I<po> files used
by I<gettext> in our translation system. I show you here the German
translations of the examples from above, from the I<po> that gets generated:

  msgid "Monthly newsletter:"
  msgstr "Monatlicher Newsletter:"

  msgctxt "size"
  msgid "Medium"
  msgstr "Mittelgroß"

  msgid "Hello %s!"
  msgstr "Hallo %s!"

  msgctxt "email"
  msgid "You have %d message."
  msgid_plural "You have %d messages."
  msgstr[0] "Du hast %d Nachricht."
  msgstr[1] "Du hast %d Nachrichten."

  msgid "%2$s has %1$d message."
  msgid_plural "%2$s has %1$d messages."
  msgstr[0] "%2$s hat %1$d Nachricht."
  msgstr[1] "%2$s hat %1$d Nachrichten."

  msgid "From %s to %s"
  msgstr "Von %s nach %s"

The pirate translation of the B<"Hello %s!"> example would look like this:

  msgid "Hello %s!"
  msgstr "%s, ahoi! hrrr"

Our example to change the order of the placeholders would look like this:

  msgid "From %s to %s"
  msgstr "To %2$s from %1$s"

In the case of a language which has more than 2 plural forms (See
L</Grammatical numbers>), the number in the brackets will just get stacked up:

  msgid "You have %d message."
  msgid_plural "You have %d messages."
  msgstr[0] "Mas %d spravu."
  msgstr[1] "Mas %d spravy."
  msgstr[2] "Mas %d sprav."

Interesting sidenote, the highest amount of plural forms is 6. You can find
this in the L<Arabic language|https://duckduckgo.com/?q=arabic>.

In the case of the placeholder with an amount and a dynamic text, a translation
which uses the correct order, can of course then use the normal I<sprintf>
placeholders definition:

  msgid "%2$s has %1$d message."
  msgid_plural "%2$s has %1$d messages."
  msgstr[0] "%d Nachricht hat %s."
  msgstr[1] "%d Nachrichten hat %s."

=head3 Voting translations

On the community platform, you are able to vote for an existing translation,
instead of making your own translation. If you, by mistake, haven't seen the
existing translation, your translation will automatically get converted to a
note for this translation.

=head3 Used translation

The system which generates the translation I<po> files for all the languages,
picks the translation by finding the translation with the most votes. If there
are several translations with the same amount of votes, the translation will be
used where the translator has the highest B<grade> in this language. We will
explain this in the community platform section (L</The community platform>)
more deeply. This process happens at the release of the translations.

=head3 Releasing translations

I<This section is very technical, and can be skipped. Just go directly to
L</Token domains>.>

The generated I<po> files will be packed together with all other necessary data
files, like the I<mo> file and the I<json> file for the JavaScript, as a Perl
distribution for our central B<DuckPAN> server, which is used to fetch the
releases of the open source development to our live systems. The code for these
procedures is in the package
L<DDGC::LocaleDist|https://github.com/duckduckgo/community-platform/blob/master/lib/DDGC/LocaleDist.pm>
in the L<source code of the community
platform|https://github.com/duckduckgo/community-platform>.

=head2 Token domains

For organizational reasons, but also for technical matters, we are required to
group the tokens in the so called B<token domains>. The terminology is taken from
I<gettext>, which also defines that one I<po> file is one specific domain. We
normally define a default domain at the initialization of our translation library.
This way we never need to care about the domain on the function calls for the
translation library.

Also the release of the translations (See L<|/Releasing translations>) is
executed for every token domain individually. On the live systems we install
all the latest releases of all token domains at once.

=head3 Token domains in the community platform

In the community platform (L</The community platform>), the different token
domains are independent lists of tokens. This allows translators to pick the
block of tokens they want to work on. It is very important to understand that
a half done translation is nearly as usable as no translation at all. The
translators must be encouraged to finish up all tokens of a domain, only then
it really makes sense to promote wider the specific project part to the users.
We tell more about this in the section L</The community platform>.

=head3 Token domain translation functions

I<This section is very technical, and can be skipped. Just go directly to
L</Overlapping tokens>.>

Our translation library (See L<|/Locale::Simple>) also supports functions which
use a specific token domain directly as parameter, but those functions are (so
far) never used at DuckDuckGo. A switch between several domains inside one code
file or template is avoided. They are called B<ld()>, B<ldn()>, B<ldp()> and
B<ldnp()> and work exactly like already described with translation functions, but
take the name of the token domain, that has to be used as first parameter. The
function setting the default token domain is B<ltd()>.

=head3 Overlapping tokens

The definition of a token is bound to its token domain. This means that 2
identical tokens in 2 domains are still 2 independent tokens and still both
need to be translated. In most cases, this sadly leads to a pointless
translation with the exactly same meaning and probably even in the exactly same
context. It is very hard to avoid this.

Still there are cases left where the context given with the token domain might
slighty fix the interpretation more deeply. Only because a token seems very
identical in the English language does not directly lead to the same
interpretation with other languages.

=head2 The community platform

